---
id: "2001"
title: "공학컴퓨터프로그래밍 기말고사"
excerpt: "공학컴퓨터프로그래밍 기말고사를 준비하며 정리한 자료"
date: "2025-12-09"
author: "양호준"
tags: ["University"]
---
# 공학컴퓨터프로그래밍 기말 준비

## UML
Modeling is Process of abstraction of a real-world system.
Why Modeling Software?
Software is getting more complex. Need simpler representations of complex systems.

UML(Unified Modeling Language)
- Standard for modeling object-oriented software.
- Collection of graphical notation.
- Method to visualize the system.

Advantage of UML
- Help specifying, visualizing, documenting software.
- Enhance communication between people.
- Able to capture the logical software architectur.

Architecture
- Requirement -> Design -> Implementation -> Verification -> Deployment -> Maintenance.

UML Diagrams
Behaviour Diagram: Activity, Use Case, Sequence, Communication, Interaction, State Machine
Structure Diagram: Class, Component, Package, Deployment, Object

Use case diagram
- Describe functional behavior of the system
- In user’s perspective
Class diagram
- Describe the static structure of the system
Sequence diagram
- Describe the dynamic behavior between actors and the system
Activity diagram
- Describe the dynamic behaviors of the system

Use Case Diagram
- Functional requirements: e.g., register user, send email, display picture
- Non-functional requirements: e.g., security (must use AES encryption), performance(must be done within 3 seconds)
- High level view of what system does
An actor model an external entity which interact with the system.
Use Case represents a class of functionality provided by the system.
System boundary represent the scope of the system.

Use Case Diagram Relationship
Types of relationship:
- Association relationship represents interaction between actors and use cases
-- Using a line to connect the actor and the use case
- Include relationship represents a use case includes the functionality of another use case
-- Using a dashed arrow to indicate including and included use case.
- Extend relationship represents optional or exceptional cases.
-- Using a dashed arrow and “extend” keyword.
- Generalization relationship represents one use case is a specialized version of another
-- Arrow pointing from specialized one to general one

